Marien states that the drum is a tool of liberation humanity and reclamation and that bomba has a powerful energy that unifies. She also discusses the history of the Delegación de los Cangrejos (San Juan)
Marien states that even though Africans were ripped from their homelands their histories in Puerto Rico were not erased but added to Puerto Rican culture and music. She explains that they used their consciousness and the drums around them to create community history and resistance. She adds that this energy is felt on a communal level. She also says that bomba is paying tribute to two bomba elders Ramon Allers and Maria Cristy who dedicated their lives to the cultural labor of bomba. Maria Christy is unique in that she composes music, sings, dances, and plays the barril.
Ramón "Papo" Allers Ponce is the grandson of a bomba matriarch from Mayaguez known as Asuncion Cavalleri. Later on, Marien gives Ramon an artisan-made maraca as a tribute to his legacy. Ramon directs a bomba school in Mayaguez. Of his grandfather's nephews he was the only one who took up learning bomba. Allers states that culture will never die as long as there is interest in bomba, reflecting a broader theme of music sustainability. This is reflected by the growing numbers of students enrolling in his school in Mayaguez, and the increasing attendees performing at the annual encuentros de los tambores.
Liz Sara Diaz Nadal of the Delegación del Oeste spans from La Sabana Grande to Isabella. This year they were motivated to participate as a result of Ramon Aller's tribute.
Marien Torres explains that seven delegations are participating in the Encuentros de Tambores. These delegations include Cangrejos, Diáspora, Loíza, Este, Oeste, Norte, Sur, and Carolinas. To qualify, each delegation must have at least 25 drummers available to represent its region. Torres emphasizes the significance of the event, noting that it is an annual regional gathering that brings together participants ranging from amateurs to professionals. The encuentros take regions and combine them into zones. Uniting these regions into zones helps different bomba scenes to grow and to work together.
"Cimarrón, Cimarrona" Kily Vializ of the Delegación del Oeste CoroYo soy cimarrónYo soy cimarrón Y me voy pa la monte
"San Paulé". Composed by Norberto Sanchez
Felipe "Junito" Febres. Discusses inclusivity within the bomba delegations
Amaury Febres Delegacion del Este. Bomba's encuentros serve as a node for reuniting bomba practitioners.
"De los padres de la bomba". Composed by Anel Rivera VazquezCoroDe los padres de la bomba Bailar
"Palo y Machete" Carlos O. Padilla CaraballoCoroManuel es un cimmaron Con el machete cimmaron conta un revolucion Versos
"Soy mas que un color de piel" Shantille Quinones de Jesus of the Delegación de Loíza
José Archeval director of the Delegación del Sur
"Ñeco Flores y Sico Mangual" Julia Laporte
John Edgar Rivera states that Carolina is known for various regional bomba rhythms. The most famous of these being hoya mula. He also states that the most important aspect of bomba is community formation.
"Preguntale a Martina" John E. Rivera Rosa of the Delegación de las CarolinasCoro
Preguntale a Martina donde esta los marineros?Preguntale a Martina donde esta los barrileros?VersoRobaron el sombrero
Ivelisse discusses visibility in regard to the Puerto Rican diaspora.
"Cimmaronaje" Norka Hernandez Nadal Delegación de la Diáspora
Corta la caña Manuel
Caña no muero
Corta la caña ManuelCaña no mueroCoroAy
"Sesa se vre". Composed by Hector Luis Rivera Ortiz of the Delegación de la Diáspora. "Sesa se vre" was composed in Creole, not in Spanish.CoroSe sa se vre VersoEske nou nube bezwen bambula Sesa se vre
Marien discusses how bomba has been historically marginalized and that bomba attests again this. She says that bomba is powerful due to its reach even into the diaspora. Bomba is a powerful tool of healing, channeling feelings, and quality of life. The purpose of creating this event is to help bomba enter into new spaces (academic and otherwise).
Despite its challenges, the speaker claims bomba will sustain itself because it lives in the heart of all Puerto Ricans.
"Hija del Alma". Composed by Maria Cristina "Cristy" and Alfonso MangualCoroHija del alma Mamá te dijo Baila esta bombaBaila conmigo
Hector Christina Giovanni Cruz dancing with a panuelo or a handkerchief.
754 participants of bomba gathered for the 10th Encuentro de los Tambores.
Marien Torres explains that the diaspora is an essential part of bomba. She also notes that the festival’s title is meant to be inclusive of other Afro-Caribbean regions and cultures which is why Norma Salazar chose the name Encuentro de Tambores instead of Encuentro de Barriles. Torres adds that bambula means “to recognize” and her intention is for the festival to continue growing while emphasizing that bomba is rooted in Africa.
"Candela" Julia Laporte
Discussion of Southern bomba rhythms
Marien states that the significance of the Encuentros is that it creates a "ripple effect." The organizers are hoping to break a record of more than 324 bomba practitioners.
"Cunyá Levedón". Composed by Domingo PublicoCoroCunyá Levedón que adora dora doraCunyá Levedón que adora dora doraVersosBailame la bomba
"Medley Tradicional" Domingo Publico
Discussion of southern rhythms. Belen and cuembe are Southern bomba rhythms.